---
layout: post
title: JRuby, Windows, and C Extensions
---

You've found a really useful RubyGem but can't use it on your JRuby Windows
machine because it's a **native C extension**. And yes, it's only available
in source. And if you did get it to compile, you'd slam face first into the
well-known fact that JRuby doesn't work with native RubyGems.

Fahrvergnügen!

"No problem, I'll just port it to Java" says your always-optimistic-but-clueless
other self. "Great, another one-off to support" you mutter as reality saunters back
into view.

Just about to call it quits, you find [this post](http://blog.bithug.org/2010/11/rsoc)
about some cool Ruby Summer of Code work by Tim Felgentreff. Oddly, you
stumble upon the [DevKit toolchain](https://github.com/oneclick/rubyinstaller/wiki/Development-Kit)
 for Windows systems, it falls into place, and everything begins to look a
little brighter.

But why would anyone do that? Well, one of the [JRuby guys](http://blog.headius.com/2010/07/what-jruby-c-extension-support-means-to.html)
has a few words on the matter.

Always the <del>sceptic</del> realist, you decide to see how The Pipe Dream
works out with a few of the well-known native RubyGems from the ether.

Turns out, it's as easy as:

1. Clone JRuby's GitHub repository
2. Download and install the DevKit
3. Build JRuby with C extension support
4. RubyGem install-o-rama!
5. Smoke test the RubyGems

## Cloning JRuby's Repository

Using your existing [msysgit](http://code.google.com/p/msysgit) installation, type

<pre class="shell">
C:\>git clone git://github.com/jruby/jruby.git jruby-dev
Cloning into jruby-dev...
done.

C:\>
</pre>

## Installing the DevKit

First, download the [DevKit](http://rubyinstaller.org/downloads) and install it to a
directory without spaces, say `C:\DevKit`. Next, run the following after you've updated
the DevKit's `config.yml` file to point to the JRuby repository you just cloned. For
more detailed instructions check out the [DevKit installation](https://github.com/oneclick/rubyinstaller/wiki/Development-Kit)
and [DevKit upgrade](https://github.com/oneclick/rubyinstaller/wiki/FAQ#upgrade_dk) wiki pages.

<pre class="shell">
C:\DevKit>type config.yml
# ...SNIP...
#
---
- C:/jruby-dev

C:\DevKit>ruby dk.rb install
[INFO] Installing 'C:/jruby-dev/lib/ruby/site_ruby/1.8/rubygems/defaults/operating_system.rb'
[INFO] Installing 'C:/jruby-dev/lib/ruby/site_ruby/shared/devkit.rb'

C:\DevKit>
</pre>

## Building JRuby with C Extension Support

Make sure you've setup your Ant+JDK build environment correctly, bring the
DevKit's build tools and git onto `PATH`, and build JRuby via

<pre class="shell">
C:\DevKit>devkitvars
Adding the DevKit to PATH...

C:\DevKit>cd \jruby-dev

C:\jruby-dev>echo %PATH%
C:\DevKit\bin;C:\DevKit\mingw\bin;C:\git\cmd;C:\ant\bin;C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.6.0_22\bin;
C:\Windows\system32;C:\Windows;C:\Windows\System32\Wbem

C:\jruby-dev>ant clean jar cext
...SNIP...
cext:

BUILD SUCCESSFUL
Total time: 2 minutes 5 seconds
C:\jruby-dev>
</pre>

## Installing Some RubyGems

Ensure your setup is correct by opening a new shell, adding your newly built
JRuby to `PATH`, and running a quick smoke test via

<pre class="shell">
C:\>echo %PATH%
C:\jruby-dev\bin;C:\Windows\system32;C:\Windows;C:\Windows\System32\Wbem

C:\>jruby --version
jruby 1.6.0.dev (ruby 1.8.7 patchlevel 249) (2010-11-30 88ad204) (Java HotSpot(TM)
Client VM 1.6.0_22) [Windows 7-x86-java]

C:\>jruby -e "puts 'Hello from Ruby-on-%s' % RUBY_PLATFORM.capitalize"
Hello from Ruby-on-Java

C:\>jruby -S gem env
RubyGems Environment:
  - RUBYGEMS VERSION: 1.3.7
  - RUBY VERSION: 1.8.7 (2010-11-30 patchlevel 249) [java]
  - INSTALLATION DIRECTORY: C:/jruby-dev/lib/ruby/gems/1.8
  - RUBY EXECUTABLE: C:/jruby-dev/bin/jruby.exe
  - EXECUTABLE DIRECTORY: C:/jruby-dev/bin
  - RUBYGEMS PLATFORMS:
    - ruby
    - universal-java-1.6
  - GEM PATHS:
     - C:/jruby-dev/lib/ruby/gems/1.8
     - C:/Users/Jon/.gem/jruby/1.8

  ...SNIP...

C:\>
</pre>

Now, let's install the `rdiscount` and `curb` gems.

`rdiscount` is simple enough, but to install `curb` you need to have already
installed `curl`'s header and library development artifacts. As the DevKit is
based upon MinGW, a great place to get these [development artifacts](http://www.gknw.net/mirror/curl/win32/)
is from Guenter Knauf who distributes Curl's Windows binaries. Thank him when
you get a moment.

Although I use `jruby -S gem` you can also use just `gem` if the JRuby bindir
is the only (or first) Ruby on your `PATH`. Note, the `--platform=ruby` option
forces RubyGems to attempt to build the native gem rather than trying to install
a gem specifically built for JRuby. For example, [EventMachine](http://rubyeventmachine.com/)
has a Java specific gem in addition other platform specific gems and a source gem.
But that is a topic for a future post.

Moving on...

<pre class="shell">
C:\>jruby -S gem install rdiscount --platform=ruby
JRuby limited openssl loaded. http://jruby.org/openssl
gem install jruby-openssl for full support.
Temporarily enhancing PATH to include DevKit...
Building native extensions.  This could take a while...
Successfully installed rdiscount-1.6.5
1 gem installed

C:\>jruby -S gem install curb --platform=ruby -- --with-curl-lib="c:/curl/bin" --with-curl-include="c:/curl/include"
JRuby limited openssl loaded. http://jruby.org/openssl
gem install jruby-openssl for full support.
Temporarily enhancing PATH to include DevKit...
Building native extensions.  This could take a while...
Successfully installed curb-0.7.8
1 gem installed

C:\>jruby -S gem list

*** LOCAL GEMS ***

curb (0.7.8)
rdiscount (1.6.5)
sources (0.0.1)

C:\>
</pre>

## Smoke Test the RubyGems

Make sure the directory you used with `--with-curl-lib` containing the `curl` DLL
is on `PATH`.

<pre class="shell">
C:\>jruby -rubygems -e "require 'rdiscount'; puts RDiscount.new('**Hello JRuby**').to_html"
calling init (63288dd6)
&lt;p&gt;&lt;strong&gt;Hello JRuby&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;/p&gt;

C:\>type curbee.rb
require 'rubygems'
require 'curb'

c = Curl::Easy.perform("http://www.google.com")
puts 'URL: %s' % c.url
puts 'IP: %s' % c.primary_ip
puts 'Request Size: %s' % c.request_size

C:\>jruby curbee.rb
calling init (63fc1560)
URL: http://www.google.com
IP: 72.14.204.103
Request Size: 53

C:\>
</pre>

Yeh!

## Conclusion

So what does it all mean? Simply put, a wider spectrum of code reuse options for
you as both a developer and user of JRuby on Windows.

One of the more interesting options is the ability to defer, perhaps completely,
custom development by enabling you to focus your limited resources on the areas
of your product in which you add real value, thereby getting you to 'go-live'
faster. For me, JRuby's C extension support is a compelling code reuse and
aggregation technology that enhances JRuby's existing integration capabilities.

From that perspective, take another read of both [Tim](http://blog.bithug.org/2010/11/rsoc)
and [Charles](http://blog.headius.com/2010/07/what-jruby-c-extension-support-means-to.html)
posts.

### Future Post Spoiler

Is it really always this easy? Well, most of the times yes, but sometimes no.
There are a few caveats, but they're for a future post. For example, why is
the first "failure" not really a failure?

<pre class="shell">
C:\>jruby -S gem install eventmachine --platform=ruby --pre
JRuby limited openssl loaded. http://jruby.org/openssl
gem install jruby-openssl for full support.
Temporarily enhancing PATH to include DevKit...
Building native extensions.  This could take a while...
ERROR:  Error installing eventmachine:
        ERROR: Failed to build gem native extension.

...SNIP...

cmain.cpp:752:20: error: 'fstat' was not declared in this scope
g++.exe: unrecognized option '-EHs'
g++.exe: unrecognized option '-GR'
make: *** [cmain.o] Error 1

C:\>jruby -s gem install eventmachine --pre
JRuby limited openssl loaded. http://jruby.org/openssl
gem install jruby-openssl for full support.
Successfully installed eventmachine-1.0.0.beta.2-java
1 gem installed

C:\>
</pre>
